



PLUS BoF                                                     B. Trammell
Internet-Draft                                                ETH Zurich
Intended status: Informational                           August 03, 2016
Expires: February 4, 2017


 Abstract Mechanisms for a Cooperative Path Layer under Endpoint Contol
                   draft-trammell-plus-abstract-mech

Abstract

   This document describes the operation of three abstract mechanisms
   for supporting an explicitly cooperative path layer in the Internet
   architecture.  Three mechanisms are described: sender to path
   signaling with receiver integrity verification; path to receiver
   signaling with confidential feedback to sender; and direct path to
   sender signaling.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 4, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Trammell                Expires February 4, 2017                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Path Layer Mechanisms              August 2016


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Mechanism Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Sender-to-Path Declarations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Path-to-Receiver Declarations with Feedback . . . . . . .   4
     2.3.  Direct Path-to-Sender Declarations  . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Technical Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1.  Cryptographic Context Bootstrapping . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.2.  Adding Integrity and Confidentiality Protection Along the
           Path  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   The boundary between the network and transport layers was originally
   defined to be that between information used (and potentially
   modified) hop-by- hop, and that used end-to-end.  End-to-end
   information in the transport layer is associated with state at the
   endpoints, but processing of network-layer information was assumed to
   be stateless.

   The widespread deployment of network address and port translation
   (NAPT) in the Internet has eroded this boundary.  Since the first
   four bytes after the IP header or header chain - the source and
   destination ports - are frequently used for forwarding and access
   control decisions, and are routinely modified on path, they have de
   facto become part of the network layer.  In-network functions that
   exploit the fact that transport headers are in cleartext in the
   absence of widespread deployment of IPsec [RFC4301] further erode
   this boundary.

   Evolution above the network layer and integrity of transport layer
   functions is only possible if this layer boundary is reinforced.
   Asking on-path devices nicely not to muck about in the transport
   layer and below - stating in an RFC that devices on path MUST NOT use
   or modify some header field - has not proven to be of much use here.
   A new approach is necessary, consisting of cryptographic integrity
   protection of network and transport layer headers which the endpoints
   choose to expose to the path, and cryptographic confidentiality
   protection of transport layer headers not to be exposed.



Trammell                Expires February 4, 2017                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Path Layer Mechanisms              August 2016


   We define the "path layer" to consist of the headers and associated
   functions that are explicitly exposed to devices along the path in
   this scheme.  This document describes three abstract mechanisms for
   implementing path layer communications.  The first principles in the
   design of these mechanisms are endpoint control, signaling
   transparency, and support of arbitrary relationships between
   endpoints and path devices.

   The principle of endpoint control means that all signaling, even from
   the path, is initiated by a sending endpoint, allowing a sending
   endpoint to opt into or out of path layer communications as it sees
   fit.

   The principle of signaling transparency means that at least the
   semantic type of all signals using these mechanisms must be visible
   to all path elements.  This makes it possible for users and network
   operators to use traffic inspection to observe what is being
   signaled.  As a last resort, users and networks wishing to limit
   signaling using these mechanisms can simply drop packets containing
   signals they would prefer not to have sent.

   The principle of arbitrary relationship means that the basic
   mechanisms do not require any trust or cryptographic state between
   endpoints and path elements to function, though integrity protection
   and confidentiality for communication with path elements can be
   layered over these mechanisms; definition of key exchange and
   cryptographic protocols for this layering is out of scope for this
   document, however.

2.  Mechanism Definitions

   Three abstract mechanisms suffice to implement in-band path layer
   communications, given our first principles.  First, a sender can make
   declarations about itself or about traffic it is sending to devices
   along the path, relying on the receiver to verify integrity of the
   declaration.  Second, a sender can allow path elements to make
   declarations about themselves or their treatment of given traffic, by
   creating space for the path elements to do so.  In this case, the
   integrity of the presence, type, and size of this space is verified
   by the receiver, but not the content of the declaration made by the
   path.  Third, a path element can make a declaration about a dropped
   packet back to the sender of that packet.

   These mechanisms are described in an implementation-independent way;
   however, there are a few basic assumptions made by the design:

   o  The mechanisms can add information to selected packets in a
      communication between two endpoints.



Trammell                Expires February 4, 2017                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Path Layer Mechanisms              August 2016


   o  The mechanisms can use a shared secret between the two endpoints
      provided by some upper layer.

   o  The confidentiality and integrity of upper layer's headers and
      payload are cryptographically protected by the upper layer.

   o  The declarations carried by the mechanisms can be expressed in
      terms of key- value pairs, such that the type and semantic meaning
      of the declaration are completely defined by the key.  The
      mechanisms don't necessarily need to be implemented using a
      generic key-value framing (e.g.  CBOR [RFC7049]); the key can be
      implied by a position in a defined packet header.

2.1.  Sender-to-Path Declarations

   To make a declaration about a packet or flow to all path elements,
   the sender adds a key-value pair to a packet within the flow.  The
   fact that this is a sender-to-path declaration is part of the
   definition of the key.  Multiple declarations can appear in a single
   packet.  All the declarations within a packet, together with other
   transport and network layer information which must not be modified by
   the path, are protected by a message authentication code (MAC) sent
   along with the packet, generated with a key derived from a secret
   known only to the endpoints.

   The receiver then verifies the MAC on receipt.  Verification failure
   implies an attempt to modify the header used by this mechanism, and
   therefore must cause the transport association to reset.

   This arrangement is illustrated in Figure 1.

   [imagine some gratuitously colorful SVG here]


                   Figure 1: Sender to Path Declaration

2.2.  Path-to-Receiver Declarations with Feedback

   To allow one or more path elements to make a declaration about itself
   with respect to a packet or a flow to the receiver, the sender adds a
   key-value pair to a packet within the flow.  The fact that this is a
   path-to-receiver declaration is part of the definition of the key.
   Further, the value has a fixed length of N bytes (which my also be
   part of the definition of the key).  Path-to-receiver declarations
   may be combined in a packet with sender-to-path declarations as in
   Section 2.1, and are covered by the same MAC.  However, when
   calculating the MAC for a path-to-receiver declaration, its value is
   assumed to be an N-byte array of zeroes.  The MAC therefore protects



Trammell                Expires February 4, 2017                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Path Layer Mechanisms              August 2016


   the presence of the key and the length of the value, but not its
   content.

   The initial value of a path-to-receiver declaration is up to the
   sender, and is generally defined by the declaration itself.  The
   behavior of a path element in filling in a path-to-receiver
   declaration given which value is already present is also part of the
   declaration defintion.  Declarations may accumulate by some operation
   (e.g., max, min, sum for measurement declarations), be determined by
   the first or last path element, or be addressed to a specific path
   element to fill in.

   This arrangement is illustrated in Figure 2.

   [imagine some gratuitously colorful SVG here]


                  Figure 2: Path to Receiver Declaration

   This mechanism allows the sender to allow the receiver to receive
   path declarations.  However, if it is the sender that needs to know
   the final result of the path declaration, this can be fed back to the
   sender over an encrypted channel.  Depending on the characteristics
   of the upper layer, this encrypted channel can either be provided by
   the upper layer, or be provided by the layer implementing the
   mechanisms, using a key derived from the same secret known only to
   the endpoints used to generate the MAC.  The fact that a path-to-
   receiver declaration should be fed back to the sender is part of the
   definition of the key.

   This arrangement is illustrated in Figure 3.

   [imagine some gratuitously colorful SVG here]


                        Figure 3: Receiver Feedback

2.3.  Direct Path-to-Sender Declarations

   Path-to-receiver declaration is impossible if a path element will
   drop a packet.  In order to allow a path element to provide
   information about why a packet was dropped, it can send back a packet
   containing only a path-to-sender declaration.  The fact that this is
   a direct path-to-sender declaration is part of the definition of the
   key.  A path-to-sender declaration packet can only contain path-to-
   sender declarations.  Since in the general case the path element has
   no shared secret with which to generate a MAC, this declaration
   cannot be integrity protected.



Trammell                Expires February 4, 2017                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Path Layer Mechanisms              August 2016


   In order for a path-to-sender declaration to traverse any network
   address translation (NAT) function along the path, the path element
   must send the packet with the IP addresses and transport/
   encapsulation layer ports reversed.

   The sender must indicate it is willing to receive path-to-sender
   declarations, and this indication must include some nonce or other
   identifier that is hard to guess by devices not on path, which is
   returned with the path-to-sender declaration to identify the packet
   to which the declaration applies.

   Only one path-to-sender declaration packet may be sent per dropped
   packet; this mitigates the abuse of this mechanism for executing
   amplified reflection attacks.

   This arrangement is illustrated in Figure 4.

   [imagine some gratuitously colorful SVG here]


               Figure 4: Direct Path to Sender Declarations

3.  Technical Considerations

   A few details must be considered in the implementation of the
   mechanisms described above; some are general, and some apply only in
   specific circumstances.  They are described in the subsections below.

3.1.  Cryptographic Context Bootstrapping

   These mechanisms rely on an upper layer to establish a cryptographic
   context in order to establish a shared secret from which MAC keys can
   be derived.  This cryptographic state may be established with each
   transport session or may be resumable across multiple transport
   sessions, depending on the upper layer's design.  If no context
   exists, though, the integrity of the declarations made via these
   mechanisms cannot be protected by MAC.  We propose two possible
   solutions to this situation:

   1.  The mechanisms can be implemented such that MAC is mandatory.  In
       this arrangement, no sender-to-path and/or path-to-receiver
       declarations can be made until cryptographic context is
       bootstrapped.  The vocabulary of declarations can therefore not
       include declarations that must be sent on the first packet.

   2.  The mechanisms can be implemented such that the MAC is eventual.
       In this arrangement, sender-to-path declarations can be made
       before cryptographic context establishment, but are open to



Trammell                Expires February 4, 2017                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Path Layer Mechanisms              August 2016


       undetected modification along the path; path-to-receiver
       declarations are not allowed before cryptographic context
       establishment.  A MAC for previous sender-to-path declarations
       must be sent after cryptographic context establishment; lack of
       receiving this MAC within a small number of packets from the
       sender is treated by the receiver as verification failure and
       leads to transport association reset.

3.2.  Adding Integrity and Confidentiality Protection Along the Path

   If a path element and the sender share some cryptographic context
   through some out-of-band means, sender to path declarations can also
   be integrity protected using a MAC generated by the sender and
   carried within the declaration itself.  In this case, if the path
   element fails to verify the MAC, it simply ignores the declaration.

   Similarly, if a path element and the receiver share some
   cryptographic context through some out-of-band means, path to
   receiver declarations can also be integrity protected using a MAC
   generated by the path element and carried within the declaration
   itself.  The use of a MAC is part of the definition of the key.  In
   this case, if the receiver fails to verify the MAC, it causes a
   transport association reset.

   This design pattern can also be used to address sender-to-path
   declarations to specific path elements: a declaration with an
   encrypted value is inherently addressed to only those path elements
   that possess the private or secret key to decrypt the value.

   In each of these cases, the presence of a MAC within the declaration
   value and/or encryption of the declaration value is part of the
   definition of the key.  Further definition of mechanisms for building
   cryptographic protocols over these mechanisms is out of scope for
   this document.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.  A future document specifying
   a concrete implementation of these mechanisms and a vocabulary of
   declarations may create and modify an IANA registry of such
   declarations.  [EDITOR'S NOTE: please remove this section at
   publication.]

5.  Security Considerations

   This document describes abstract mechanisms by which endpoints can
   share information about traffic flows with devices along the path,
   replacing the functions currently performed using traffic inspection



Trammell                Expires February 4, 2017                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Path Layer Mechanisms              August 2016


   of cleartext transport headers with explicit exposure when those
   headers are encrypted.  The security and privacy threat posed by the
   application of these abstract mechanisms is a function of the
   vocabulary of declarations the endpoints use these mechanisms to
   expose.  Care must be taken in defining this vocabulary, both to
   prevent the definition of declarations that are obviously threatening
   to privacy (e.g.  high-resolution, cleartext exposure of client
   device location) or insecure (e.g. exposure of session keys for
   transport headers and payload), as well as to minimize the potential
   for these declarations to be used as part of a device or user
   fingerprint for tracking and surveillance purposes.

6.  Acknowledgments

   This work is supported by the European Commission under Horizon 2020
   grant agreement no. 688421 Measurement and Architecture for a
   Middleboxed Internet (MAMI), and by the Swiss State Secretariat for
   Education, Research, and Innovation under contract no. 15.0268.  This
   support does not imply endorsement.

   Thanks to Aaron Falk, Ted Hardie, Joe Hildebrand, Mirja Kuehlewind,
   Mark Nottingham, Natasha Rooney, and the participants at the PLUS BoF
   at IETF 96 in Berlin for the conversations leading to and informing
   the publication of this document.  Thanks to Mark Nottingham for
   posing the questions that led to the design space for the mechanisms
   described herein.

7.  Informative References

   [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, DOI 10.17487/RFC4301,
              December 2005, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4301>.

   [RFC7049]  Bormann, C. and P. Hoffman, "Concise Binary Object
              Representation (CBOR)", RFC 7049, DOI 10.17487/RFC7049,
              October 2013, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7049>.

Author's Address

   Brian Trammell
   ETH Zurich

   Email: ietf@trammell.ch








Trammell                Expires February 4, 2017                [Page 8]
